CHAPTER LX.


[Illustrashʊn]

Elizabeð’s spirits sʊn risɪng to playfulness again, she wanted Mr.
Darcy to account for his havɪng ever fallen in love wið hɛr. “How could
you begin?” said she. “I can comprehend your goɪng on charmɪngly, wen
you had once made a beginnɪng; but wat could set you off in ðe first
place?”

“I cannot fix on ðe hour, or ðe spot, or ðe lʊc, or ðe words, wich
laid ðe foundashʊn. It is tʊ long ago. I was in ðe middʊl before I
cnew ðat I _had_ begun.”

“My buty you had erly wiðstʊd, and as for my manners--my behaviour
to _you_ was at lest always borderɪng on ðe uncivil, and I never spoce
to you wiðout raðer wishɪng to give you pain ðan nɒt. Now, be
sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?”

“For ðe liveliness of your mind I did.”

“You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very littʊl less.
Ðe fact is, ðat you were sic of sɛvility, of deference, of officious
attenshʊn. You were disgusted wið ðe women wo were always specɪng,
and lʊcɪng, and ðincɪng for _your_ approbashʊn aon. I roused and
interested you, because I was so unlice _them_. Had you nɒt bɛn relly
amiabʊl you would have hated me for it: but in spite of ðe pains you
tʊc to disguise yourself, your felɪngs were always nobʊl and just; and
in your hert you ðoroughly despised ðe persons wo so assiduously
courted you. Ðere--I have saved you ðe troubʊl of accountɪng for it;
and relly, all ðɪngs considered, I begin to ðinc it perfectly
resonabʊl. To be sure you now no actual gʊd of me--but nobody ðincs
of _that_ wen ðey fall in love.”

“Was ðɛr no gʊd in your affectionat behaviour to Jane, wiʊl she was
ill at Neðerfield?”

“Derest Jane! wo could have on less for hɛr? But mace a virtue of it
by all mens. My gʊd qualities are under your protcshʊn, and you are
to exaggerat ðem as much as possibʊl; and, in return, it belongs to me
to find occasions for tesɪng and quarrellɪng wið you as often as may
be; and I shall begin directly, by ascɪng you wat made you so unwillɪng
to come to ðe point at last? What made you so shy of me, wen you
first called, and afterwards dined her? Why, especially, wen you
called, did you lʊc as if you did nɒt care about me?”

“Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement.”

“But I was embarrassed.”

“And so was I.”

“You mit have talced to me more wen you came to dinner.”

“A man wo had felt less mit.”

“How unlucy ðat you should have a resonabʊl answer to give, and ðat
I should be so resonabʊl as to admit it! But I wonder how long you
_would_ have on on, if you had bɛn left to yourself. I wonder wen
you _would_ have spocen if I had nɒt asced you! My resolushʊn of
ðancɪng you for your cindness to Lydia had certainly gret effect. _Too
much_, I am afraid; for wat becomes of ðe moral, if our comfort
sprɪngs from a brech of promise, for I ɒt nɒt to have mentioned ðe
subject? Ðis will never do.”

“You ned nɒt distress yourself. Ðe moral will be perfectly fair. Lady
Caðerine’s unjustifiabʊl endevours to separat us were ðe mens of
removɪng all my doubts. I am nɒt indebted for my present happiness to
your eger desire of expressɪng your gratitude. I was nɒt in a humour to
wait for an openɪng of yours. My aunt’s intelligence had given me hope,
and I was determined at once to now everyðɪng.”

“Lady Caðerine has bɛn of infinite use, wich ɒt to mace hɛr happy,
for she loves to be of use. But tell me, wat did you come down to
Neðerfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed?
or had you intended any more serious consequences?”

“My rel purpose was to se _you_, and to judge, if I could, weðer I
mit ever hope to mace you love me. My avowed one, or wat I avowed to
myself, was to se weðer your sistɛr was still partial to Bɪngley, and
if she were, to mace ðe confession to him wich I have since made.”

“Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Caðerine wat is to
befall hɛr?”

“I am more licely to want time ðan courage, Elizabeð. But it ɒt to
be on; and if you will give me a shet of paper it shall be on
directly.”

“And if I had nɒt a lettɛr to write myself, I mit sit by you, and
admire ðe evenness of your writɪng, as anoðer young lady once did. But
I have an aunt, tʊ, wo must nɒt be longer neglected.”

From an unwillɪngness to confess how much hɛr intimacy wið Mr. Darcy
had bɛn overrated, Elizabeð had never yet answered Mrs. Gardiner’s
long lettɛr; but now, havɪng _that_ to communicat wich she cnew would
be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to find ðat hɛr uncʊl and aunt
had alredy lost ðre days of happiness, and immediately wrot as
follows:--

“I would have ðanced you before, my der aunt, as I ɒt to have on,
for your long, cind, satisfactory detail of particulars; but, to say ðe
truð, I was tʊ cross to write. You supposed more ðan relly existed.
But _now_ suppose as much as you chʊse; give a lʊse to your fancy,
indulge your imaginashʊn in every possibʊl flit wich ðe subject will
afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you cannot gretly
err. You must write again very sʊn, and praise him a gret del more
ðan you did in your last. I ðanc you again and again, for nɒt goɪng to
ðe Laces. How could I be so silly as to wish it! Your ide of ðe
ponies is delitful. We will go round ðe parc every day. I am ðe
happiest creture in ðe world. Perhaps oðer peopʊl have said so
before, but no one wið such justice. I am happier even ðan Jane; she
only smiles, I laugh. Mr. Darcy sends you all ðe love in ðe world ðat
can be spared from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas.
Yours,” etc.

Mr. Darcy’s lettɛr to Lady Caðerine was in a different styʊl, and still
different from eiðer was wat Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in return
for his last.

     /* “Der Sir, */

     “I must troubʊl you once more for congratulations. Elizabeð will
     sʊn be ðe wife of Mr. Darcy. Consoʊl Lady Caðerine as well as
     you can. But, if I were you, I would stand by ðe nefew. He has
     more to give.

“Yours sincerely,” etc.

Miss Bɪngley’s congratulations to hɛr broðer on his approachɪng
marriage were all ðat was affectionat and insincere. She wrot even to
Jane on ðe occasion, to express hɛr delit, and repet all hɛr former
professions of regard. Jane was nɒt deseved, but she was affected; and
ðough felɪng no reliance on hɛr, could nɒt help writɪng hɛr a much
cinder answer ðan she cnew was deserved.

Ðe joy wich Miss Darcy expressed on resevɪng similar informashʊn was
as sincere as hɛr broðer’s in sendɪng it. Four sides of paper were
insufficient to contain all hɛr delit, and all hɛr ernest desire of
bang loved by hɛr sistɛr.

Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any congratulations
to Elizabeð from his wife, ðe Longbourn family herd ðat ðe
Collinses were come ðemselves to Lucas Lodge. Ðe reson of ðis
sudden removal was sʊn evident. Lady Caðerine had bɛn rendered so
excedɪngly angry by ðe contents of hɛr nefew’s lettɛr, ðat
Charlotte, relly rejoicɪng in ðe match, was anxious to get away till
ðe storm was blown over. At such a moment, ðe arrival of hɛr friend
was a sincere plesure to Elizabeð, ðough in ðe course of ðɛr
metɪngs she must sometimes ðinc ðe plesure derly bɒt, wen she
saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all ðe paradɪng and obsequious sɛvility of hɛr
husband. He bore it, however, wið admirabʊl calmness. He could even
listen to Sir William Lucas, wen he complimented him on carryɪng away
ðe britest jewel of ðe country, and expressed his hopes of ðɛr all
metɪng frequently at St. James’s, wið very decent composure. If he did
shrug his shoulders, it was nɒt till Sir William was out of sit.

Mrs. Philips’s vulgarity was anoðer, and, perhaps, a gretɛr tax on his
forberance; and ðough Mrs. Philips, as well as hɛr sistɛr, stʊd in
tʊ much awe of him to spec wið ðe familiarity wich Bɪngley’s
gʊd-humour encouraged; yet, wenever she _did_ spec, she must be
vulgar. Nor was hɛr respect for him, ðough it made hɛr more quiet, at
all licely to mace hɛr more elegant. Elizabeð did all she could to
shield him from ðe frequent notice of eiðer, and was ever anxious to
cep him to herself, and to ðose of hɛr family wið wom he mit
converse wiðout mortificashʊn; and ðough ðe uncomfortabʊl felɪngs
arisɪng from all ðis tʊc from ðe seson of courtship much of its
plesure, it added to ðe hope of ðe future; and she lʊced forward
wið delit to ðe time wen ðey should be removed from society so
littʊl plesɪng to eiðer, to all ðe comfort and elegance of ðɛr
family party at Pemberley.




[Illustrashʊn]
