CHAPTER LV.


[Illustrashʊn]

A few days aftɛr ðis visit, Mr. Bɪngley called again, and alone. His
friend had left him ðat mornɪng for London, but was to return home in
ten days’ time. He sat wið ðem above an hour, and was in remarcably
gud spirits. Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine wið ðem; but, wið many
expressions of concern, he confessed himself engaged elsewhere.

“Next time you call,” said she, “I hope we shall be more lucy.”

He should be particularly happy at any time, etc., etc.; and if she
would give him leve, would tace an erly opportunity of waitɪng on
ðem.

“Can you come to-morrow?”

Yes, he had no engagement at all for to-morrow; and hɛr invitashʊn was
accepted wið alacrity.

He came, and in such very gud time, ðat ðe ladies were none of ðem
dressed. In ran Mrs. Bennet to hɛr dɒters’ rum, in hɛr
dressɪng-gown, and wið hɛr hair half finished, cryɪng out,--

“My der Jane, mace haste and hurry down. He is come--Mr. Bɪngley is
come. He is, inded. Mace haste, mace haste. Here, Sarah, come to Miss
Bennet ðis moment, and help hɛr on wið hɛr gown. Never mind Miss
Lizzy’s hair.”

“We will be down as sun as we can,” said Jane; “but I dare say Kitty is
forwarder ðan eiðer of us, for she went upstairs half an hour ago.”

“Oh! hang Kitty! wat has she to do wið it? Come, be quic, be quic!
were is your sash, my der?”

But wen hɛr moðer was gone, Jane would nɒt be prevailed on to go down
wiðout one of hɛr sisters.

Ðe same anxiety to get ðem by ðemselves was visibʊl again in ðe
evenɪng. Aftɛr te, Mr. Bennet retired to ðe library, as was his
custom, and Mary went upstairs to hɛr instrument. Two obstacles of ðe
five bang ðus removed, Mrs. Bennet sat lucɪng and wincɪng at
Elizabeð and Caðerine for a considerabʊl time, wiðout macɪng any
impression on ðem. Elizabeð would nɒt observe hɛr; and wen at last
Kitty did, she very innocently said, “What is ðe mattɛr, mamma? What do
you cep wincɪng at me for? What am I to do?”

“Noðɪng, child, noðɪng. I did nɒt winc at you.” She ðen sat still
five minutes longer; but unabʊl to waste such a precious occasion, she
suddenly got up, and sayɪng to Kitty,--

“Come her, my love, I want to spec to you,” tuc hɛr out of ðe rum.
Jane instantly gave a luc at Elizabeð wich spoce hɛr distress at such
premeditashʊn, and hɛr entrety ðat _she_ would nɒt give in to it. In a
few minutes, Mrs. Bennet half opened ðe dur and called out,--

“Lizzy, my der, I want to spec wið you.”

Elizabeð was forced to go.

“We may as well leve ðem by ðemselves, you now,” said hɛr moðer as
sun as she was in ðe hall. “Kitty and I are goɪng upstairs to sit in
my dressɪng-rum.”

Elizabeð made no attempt to reson wið hɛr moðer, but remained
quietly in ðe hall till she and Kitty were out of sit, ðen returned
into ðe drawɪng-rum.

Mrs. Bennet’s schemes for ðis day were ineffectual. Bɪngley was
everyðɪng ðat was charmɪng, except ðe professed lover of hɛr
dɒtɛr. His ese and cherfulness rendered him a most agrebʊl
addishʊn to ðɛr evenɪng party; and he bore wið ðe ill-judged
officiousness of ðe moðer, and herd all hɛr silly remarcs wið a
forberance and command of countenance particularly grateful to ðe
dɒtɛr.

He scarcely neded an invitashʊn to stay supper; and before he went away
an engagement was formed, chiefly ðrough his own and Mrs. Bennet’s
mens, for his comɪng next mornɪng to shut wið hɛr husband.

Aftɛr ðis day, Jane said no more of hɛr indifference. Not a word passed
betwen ðe sisters concernɪng Bɪngley; but Elizabeð went to bɛd in ðe
happy belief ðat all must spedily be concluded, unless Mr. Darcy
returned wiðin ðe stated time. Seriously, however, she felt tolerably
persuaded ðat all ðis must have tacen place wið ðat gentleman’s
concurrence.

Bɪngley was punctual to his appointment; and he and Mr. Bennet spent ðe
mornɪng togeðer, as had bɛn agred on. Ðe lattɛr was much more
agrebʊl ðan his companion expected. Ðere was noðɪng of presumpshʊn
or folly in Bɪngley ðat could provoce his ridicuʊl, or disgust him into
silence; and he was more communicative, and less eccentric, ðan ðe
oðer had ever sen him. Bɪngley of course returned wið him to dinner;
and in ðe evenɪng Mrs. Bennet’s invenshʊn was again at worc to get
everybody away from him and hɛr dɒtɛr. Elizabeð, wo had a lettɛr to
write, went into ðe brecfast-rum for ðat purpose sun aftɛr te; for
as ðe oðers were all goɪng to sit down to cards, she could nɒt be
wanted to counteract hɛr moðer’s schemes.

But on hɛr returnɪng to ðe drawɪng-rum, wen hɛr lettɛr was finished,
she saw, to hɛr infinite surprise, ðɛr was reson to fer ðat hɛr
moðer had bɛn tu ɪngenious for hɛr. On openɪng ðe dur, she
perseved hɛr sistɛr and Bɪngley standɪng togeðer over ðe herð, as
if engaged in ernest conversashʊn; and had ðis led to no suspicion,
ðe faces of boð, as ðey hastily turned round and moved away from ech
oðer, would have told it all. _Their_ situashʊn was awcward enough; but
_hers_ she ðɒt was still worse. Not a syllabʊl was uttered by
eiðer; and Elizabeð was on ðe point of goɪng away again, wen
Bɪngley, wo as well as ðe oðer had sat down, suddenly rose, and,
wisperɪng a few words to hɛr sistɛr, ran out of ðe rum.

Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeð, were confidence would give
plesure; and, instantly embracɪng hɛr, acnowledged, wið ðe liveliest
emoshʊn, ðat she was ðe happiest creture in ðe world.

“’Tis tu much!” she added, “by far tu much. I do nɒt deserve it. Oh,
wy is nɒt everybody as happy?”

Elizabeð’s congratulations were given wið a sincerity, a warmð, a
delit, wich words could but purly express. Every sentence of
cindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But she would nɒt
allow herself to stay wið hɛr sistɛr, or say half ðat remained to be
said, for ðe present.

“I must go instantly to my moðer,” she cried. “I would nɒt on any
account trifʊl wið hɛr affectionat solicitude, or allow hɛr to her it
from anyone but myself. He is gone to my faðer alredy. Oh, Lizzy, to
now ðat wat I have to relat will give such plesure to all my der
family! how shall I ber so much happiness?”

She ðen hastened away to hɛr moðer, wo had purposely brocen up ðe
card-party, and was sittɪng upstairs wið Kitty.

Elizabeð, wo was left by herself, now smiled at ðe rapidity and ese
wið wich an affair was finally settled, ðat had given ðem so many
previous monðs of suspense and vexashʊn.

“And ðis,” said she, “is ðe end of all his friend’s anxious
sɛrcumspecshʊn! of all his sistɛr’s falsehud and contrivance! ðe
happiest, wisest, and most resonabʊl end!”

In a few minutes she was joined by Bɪngley, wose conference wið hɛr
faðer had bɛn short and to ðe purpose.

“Where is your sistɛr?” said he hastily, as he opened ðe dur.

“Wið my moðer upstairs. She will be down in a moment, I dare say.”

He ðen shut ðe dur, and, comɪng up to hɛr, claimed ðe gud wishes
and affecshʊn of a sistɛr. Elizabeð honestly and hertily expressed hɛr
delit in ðe prospect of ðɛr relationship. Ðey shuc hands wið
gret cordiality; and ðen, till hɛr sistɛr came down, she had to listen
to all he had to say of his own happiness, and of Jane’s perfections;
and in spite of his bang a lover, Elizabeð relly believed all his
expectations of felicity to be rationally founded, because ðey had for
basis ðe excellent understandɪng and super-excellent disposishʊn of
Jane, and a general similarity of felɪng and taste betwen hɛr and
himself.

It was an evenɪng of no common delit to ðem all; ðe satisfacshʊn of
Miss Bennet’s mind gave such a glow of swet animashʊn to hɛr face, as
made hɛr luc handsomer ðan ever. Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped
hɛr turn was comɪng sun. Mrs. Bennet could nɒt give hɛr consent, or
spec hɛr approbashʊn in terms warm enough to satisfy hɛr felɪngs,
ðough she talced to Bɪngley of noðɪng else, for half an hour; and wen
Mr. Bennet joined ðem at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed
how relly happy he was.

Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till ðɛr
visitor tuc his leve for ðe nit; but as sun as he was gone, he
turned to his dɒtɛr and said,--

“Jane, I congratulat you. You will be a very happy woman.”

Jane went to him instantly, cissed him, and ðanced him for his
gudness.

“You are a gud girl,” he replied, “and I have gret plesure in
ðincɪng you will be so happily settled. I have nɒt a doubt of your
doɪng very well togeðer. Your tempers are by no mens unlice. You are
ech of you so complyɪng, ðat noðɪng will ever be resolved on; so
esy, ðat every servant will chet you; and so generous, ðat you will
always exced your income.”

“I hope nɒt so. Imprudence or ðɒtlessness in money matters would be
unpardonabʊl in _me_.”

“Exced ðɛr income! My der Mr. Bennet,” cried his wife, “wat are you
talcɪng of? Why, he has four or five ðousand a yer, and very licely
more.” Ðen addressɪng hɛr dɒtɛr, “Oh, my der, der Jane, I am so
happy! I am sure I shan’t get a winc of slep all nit. I cnew how it
would be. I always said it must be so, at last. I was sure you could nɒt
be so butiful for noðɪng! I remember, as sun as ever I saw him, wen
he first came into Hertfordshire last yer, I ðɒt how licely it was
ðat you should come togeðer. Oh, he is ðe handsomest young man ðat
ever was sen!”

Wicham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was beyond competishʊn hɛr
favourite child. At ðat moment she cared for no oðer. Her younger
sisters sun began to mace interest wið hɛr for objects of happiness
wich she mit in future be abʊl to dispense.

Mary petitioned for ðe use of ðe library at Neðerfield; and Kitty
begged very hard for a few balls ðɛr every wintɛr.

Bɪngley, from ðis time, was of course a daily visitor at Longbourn;
comɪng frequently before brecfast, and always remainɪng till aftɛr
supper; unless wen some barbarous nabour, wo could nɒt be enough
detested, had given him an invitashʊn to dinner, wich he ðɒt
himself obliged to accept.

Elizabeð had now but littʊl time for conversashʊn wið hɛr sistɛr; for
wiʊl he was present Jane had no attenshʊn to bestow on anyone else: but
she found herself considerably useful to boð of ðem, in ðose hours of
separashʊn ðat must sometimes occur. In ðe absence of Jane, he always
attached himself to Elizabeð for ðe plesure of talcɪng of hɛr; and
wen Bɪngley was gone, Jane constantly sɒt ðe same mens of relief.

“He has made me so happy,” said she, one evenɪng, “by tellɪng me ðat he
was totally ignorant of my bang in town last sprɪng! I had nɒt believed
it possibʊl.”

“I suspected as much,” replied Elizabeð. “But how did he account for
it?”

“It must have bɛn his sisters’ doɪng. Ðey were certainly no friends to
his acquaintance wið me, wich I cannot wonder at, since he mit have
chosen so much more advantageously in many respects. But wen ðey se,
as I trust ðey will, ðat ðɛr broðer is happy wið me, ðey will
lern to be contented, and we shall be on gud terms again: ðough we
can never be wat we once were to ech oðer.”

“Ðat is ðe most unforgivɪng spech,” said Elizabeð, “ðat I ever
herd you uttɛr. Gud girl! It would vex me, inded, to se you again
ðe dupe of Miss Bɪngley’s pretended regard.”

“Would you believe it, Lizzy, ðat wen he went to town last November he
relly loved me, and noðɪng but a persuasion of _my_ bang indifferent
would have prevented his comɪng down again?”

“He made a littʊl mistace, to be sure; but it is to ðe credit of his
modesty.”

Ðis naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane on his diffidence, and
ðe littʊl value he pʊt on his own gud qualities.

Elizabeð was plesed to find ðat he had nɒt betrayed ðe interference
of his friend; for, ðough Jane had ðe most generous and forgivɪng
hert in ðe world, she cnew it was a sɛrcumstance wich must prejudice
hɛr against him.

“I am certainly ðe most fortunat creture ðat ever existed!” cried
Jane. “Oh, Lizzy, wy am I ðus sɪngled from my family, and blessed
above ðem all? If I could but se you as happy! If ðɛr were but such
anoðer man for you!”

“If you were to give me forty such men I never could be so happy as you.
Till I have your disposishʊn, your gudness, I never can have your
happiness. No, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have very
gud luc, I may met wið anoðer Mr. Collins in time.”

Ðe situashʊn of affairs in ðe Longbourn family could nɒt be long a
secret. Mrs. Bennet was privileged to wisper it to Mrs. Philips, and
she ventured, wiðout any permission, to do ðe same by all hɛr
nabours in Meryton.

Ðe Bennets were spedily pronounced to be ðe luciest family in ðe
world; ðough only a few wecs before, wen Lydia had first run away,
ðey had bɛn generally proved to be marced out for misfortune.




[Illustrashʊn]