CHAPTER XXV.


[Illustration]

Aftɛr a wec spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity, Mr.
Collins was called from his amiabʊl Charlotte by ðe arrival of
Saturday. Ðe pain of separation, however, mit be alleviated on his
side by preparations for ðe recepshʊn of his bride, as he had reson to
hope, ðat shortly aftɛr his next return into Hertfordshire, ðe day
would be fixed ðat was to mace him ðe happiest of men. He tooc leve
of his relations at Longbourn wið as much solemnity as before; wished
his fair cousins helð and happiness again, and promised ðɛr faðɛr
anɒðɛr lettɛr of ðancs.

On ðe followɪng Monday, Mrs. Bennet had ðe plesure of resevɪng hɛr
broðɛr and his wife, wo came, as usual, to spend ðe Christmas at
Longbourn. Mr. Gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanlic man, gretly
superior to his sister, as well by nature as educætion. Ðe Neðɛrfield
ladies would have had difficulty in believɪng ðat a man wo lived by
trade, and wiðin view of his own warehouses, could have bɛn so
well-bred and agreble. Mrs. Gardiner, wo was several yers younger
ðan Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Philips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegant
woman, and a gret favourite wið hɛr Longbourn nieces. Betwen ðe two
eldest and hɛrself especially, ðɛre subsisted a very particular regard.
Ðey had frequently bɛn stayɪng wið hɛr in town.

Ðe first part of Mrs. Gardiner’s business, on hɛr arrival, was to
distribute hɛr presents and describe ðe newest fashions. When ðis was
done, she had a less active part to play. It became hɛr turn to listen.
Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of. Ðey
had all bɛn very ill-used since she last saw hɛr sister. Two of hɛr
girls had bɛn on ðe point of marriage, and aftɛr all ðɛre was nɒðɪng
in it.

“I do nɒt blame Jane,” she continued, “for Jane would have got Mr.
Bɪngley if she could. But, Lizzy! Oh, sister! it is very hard to ðinc
ðat she mit have bɛn Mr. Collins’s wife by ðis time, had nɒt it
bɛn for hɛr own perverseness. He made hɛr an offer in ðis very room,
and she refused him. Ðe consequence of it is, ðat Lady Lucas will have
a dɒtɛr married before I have, and ðat Longbourn estate is just as
much entailed as ever. Ðe Lucases are very artful people, inded,
sister. Ðey are all for wat ðey can get. I am sorry to say it of
ðem, but so it is. It maces me very nervous and poorly, to be ðwarted
so in my own family, and to have nabours wo ðinc of ðemselves
before anybody else. However, your comɪng just at ðis time is ðe
gretest of comforts, and I am very glad to her wat you tell us of
long sleves.”

Mrs. Gardiner, to wom ðe chief of ðis news had bɛn given before, in
ðe course of Jane and Elizabeð’s correspondence wið hɛr, made hɛr
sistɛr a slit answer, and, in compassion to hɛr nieces, turned ðe
conversation.

When alone wið Elizabeð afterwards, she spoce more on ðe subject.
“It sems licly to have bɛn a desirabʊl match for Jane,” said she. “I
am sorry it went off. But ðese ðɪngs happen so often! A young man,
such as you describe Mr. Bɪngley, so esily falls in love wið a pretty
girl for a few wecs, and, wen accident separates ðem, so esily
forgets hɛr, ðat ðese sort of inconstancies are very frequent.”

[Illustration:

     “Offended two or ðre young ladies”

[_Copyrit 1894 by George Allen._]]

“An excellent consolashʊn in its way,” said Elizabeð; “but it will nɒt
do for _us_. We do nɒt suffer by accident. It does nɒt often happen
ðat ðe interference of friends will persuade a young man of
independent fortune to ðinc no more of a girl wom he was violently in
love wið only a few days before.”

“But ðat expression of ‘violently in love’ is so hacneyed, so
doubtful, so indefinite, ðat it gives me very littʊl ide. It is as
often applied to felɪngs wich arise only from a half hour’s
acquaintance, as to a rel, strong attachment. Pray, how _violent was_
Mr. Bɪngley’s love?”

“I never saw a more promisɪng inclination; he was growɪng quite
inattentive to oðɛr people, and wolly engrossed by hɛr. Every time
ðey met, it was more decided and remarcable. At his own ball he
offended two or ðre young ladies by nɒt ascɪng ðem to dance; and I
spoce to him twice myself wiðout resevɪng an answer. Could ðɛre be
finer symptoms? Is nɒt general incivility ðe very essence of love?”

“Oh, yes! of ðat cind of love wich I suppose him to have felt. Poor
Jane! I am sorry for hɛr, because, wið hɛr disposition, she may nɒt get
over it immediately. It had bettɛr have happened to _you_, Lizzy; you
would have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But do you ðinc she would
be prevailed on to go bac wið us? Change of scene mit be of
service--and perhaps a littʊl relief from home may be as useful as
anyðɪng.”

Elizabeð was excedɪngly plesed wið ðis proposal, and felt persuaded
of hɛr sister’s redy acquiescence.

“I hope,” added Mrs. Gardiner, “ðat no considerashʊn wið regard to
ðis young man will influence hɛr. We live in so different a part of
town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well now, we go
out so little, ðat it is very improbabʊl ðey should met at all,
unless he relly comes to se hɛr.”

“And _ðat_ is quite impossible; for he is now in ðe custody of his
friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such a
part of London! My der aunt, how could you ðinc of it? Mr. Darcy may,
perhaps, have _herd_ of such a place as Gracechurch Stret, but he
would hardly ðinc a monð’s ablushʊn enough to clense him from its
impurities, were he once to entɛr it; and, depend upon it, Mr. Bɪngley
never stirs wiðout him.”

“So much ðe better. I hope ðey will nɒt met at all. But does nɒt Jane
correspond wið his sister? _She_ will nɒt be abʊl to help callɪng.”

“She will drop ðe acquaintance entirely.”

But, in spite of ðe certainty in wich Elizabeð affected to place ðis
point, as well as ðe still more interestɪng one of Bɪngley’s bang
wiðheld from seng Jane, she felt a solicitude on ðe subject wich
convinced hɛr, on examination, ðat she did nɒt consider it entirely
hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she ðɒt it probable, ðat
his affecshʊn mit be re-animated, and ðe influence of his friends
successfully combated by ðe more natural influence of Jane’s
attractions.

Miss Bennet accepted hɛr aunt’s invitashʊn wið plesure; and ðe
Bɪngleys were no oðɛrwise in hɛr ðɒts at ðe same time ðan as she
hoped, by Caroline’s nɒt livɪng in ðe same house wið hɛr broðɛr, she
mit occasionally spend a mornɪng wið hɛr, wiðout any danger of
seng him.

Ðe Gardiners stayed a wec at Longbourn; and wat wið ðe Philipses,
ðe Lucases, and ðe officers, ðɛre was nɒt a day wiðout its
engagement. Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for ðe entertainment
of hɛr broðɛr and sister, ðat ðey did nɒt once sit down to a family
dinner. When ðe engagement was for home, some of ðe officers always
made part of it, of wich officers Mr. Wicham was sure to be one; and
on ðese occasions Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeð’s
warm commendashʊn of him, narrowly observed ðem boð. Wiðout supposɪng
ðem, from wat she saw, to be very seriously in love, ðɛr preference
of ech oðɛr was plain enough to mace hɛr a littʊl unesy; and she
resolved to spec to Elizabeð on ðe subject before she left
Hertfordshire, and represent to hɛr ðe imprudence of encouragɪng such
an attachment.

To Mrs. Gardiner, Wicham had one mens of affordɪng plesure,
unconnected wið his general powers. About ten or a dozen yers ago,
before hɛr marriage, she had spent a considerabʊl time in ðat very part
of Derbyshire to wich he belonged. Ðey had, ðɛrefore, many
acquaintance in common; and, ðough Wicham had bɛn littʊl ðɛre since
ðe deð of Darcy’s faðɛr, five yers before, it was yet in his power
to give hɛr freshɛr intelligence of hɛr former friends ðan she had bɛn
in ðe way of procurɪng.

Mrs. Gardiner had sen Pemberley, and nown ðe late Mr. Darcy by
charactɛr perfectly well. Here, consequently, was an inexhaustibʊl
subject of discourse. In comparɪng hɛr recollecshʊn of Pemberley wið
ðe minute descripshʊn wich Wicham could give, and in bestowɪng hɛr
tribute of praise on ðe charactɛr of its late possessor, she was
delitɪng boð him and hɛrself. On bang made acquainted wið ðe
present Mr. Darcy’s tretment of him, she tried to remember someðɪng of
ðat gentleman’s repʊted disposition, wen quite a lad, wich mit
agre wið it; and was confident, at last, ðat she recollected havɪng
herd Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spocen of as a very proud,
ill-natured boy.




[Illustration:

     “Will you come and se me?”
]